---
layout: post
title:  Taking Healthcare online is not enough, without Interoperability
date: 2023-12-18 16:25:00
description: What happens with EMR?
tags: EMR healthcare interoperability
categories: providertech
tikzjax: true
---
Remember the doctor down the street, the one who knew your family from their birth certificates? Back then, a sniffle and a cough meant a friendly chat and a bottle of cherry syrup. But medicine's grown complex, like a sprawling city instead of a cozy corner store. Specialized care, longer lifespans, and intricate reimbursement rules – they all built skyscrapers where cottages once stood, and keeping track of it all became crucial. Now, Electronic Medical Records (EMR) play a pivotal role in streamlining patient care, enhancing communication, and improving overall healthcare outcomes. Taking things "online" helped maintain an organized view of a patient's data. As the industry fragmented further, with the rise in systems like the hub-and-spoke model, regular primary care visits, and the increase in the need for holistic care, the data from patients still remained siloed. Patients were being asked to take the same tests, first at the primary care clinic and then at each specialist clinic visit.

<div class="row">
    <div class="col-sm mt-3 mt-md-0">
        {% include figure.html path="assets/img/jmh_1.png" title="EMR" class="img-fluid rounded z-depth-1" %}
    </div>
</div>

The reimbursement sector introduced some structure and demanded data streamlining to improve funding rates. While this created a centralized repository of data in the form of claims data, this did not result in improving patient experience or outcomes directly. The need to document increased, as did the burden on physicians with a rise in pajama time. With the rise in AI, several healthcare providers have turned to AI to generate notes to maintain the integrity of their notes. Health systems like John Muir Health in integration with Ambience Healthcare have made great strides in reducing the documentation burden. Siloed improvements are great- the patient has everything addressed and available to them within the health system, but what if the patient visits an ER when they are on vacation? In recent times, access has decreased in parts of the country. Data interoperability is the next natural step, and I think it is the one that will transform healthcare access and outcomes.

